.. Theoretical Universe (c) by St√©phane Haussler
.. 
.. Theoretical Universe is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
.. International License. You should have received a copy of the license along
.. with this work. If not, see <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>.

Theoretical Universe
====================

This series was initially conceived as a set of short, independent articles.
However, it has expanded beyond my initial expectation. It all begins with the
derivation of the electromagnetic field tensor from Maxwell's equations of
1865, a process straightforward for those with a grasp of vector calculus and
matrix multiplication.

My exploration extended to Riemannian manifolds, differential forms, and the
exterior derivative. I delved into musical isomorphisms and the Hodge dual,
encapsulating these concepts in what I term *the Cartan-Hodge formalism*. This
comprehensive framework facilitated a systematic analysis of rotation
representation in differential form and a thorough examination of differential
operators within this context. Notably, I dissected the exterior derivative of
rotations, leading to the my understanding that it precisely mirrors Maxwell's
equations, offering a fully coherent demonstration of the formulation of
Maxwell's equations in differential form.

Some of the content of these articles, although certainly not *new*, may offer
insights which may not be widely known. I present the details of all
calculations to give the reader a chance to follow or find mistakes. Ifyou are
aware of freely available resources I should cite, open an issue and I will
include a reference. If you find mistakes, don't hesitate to open an issue or
directly provide corrections by sending a merge request to my `Github
repository <https://github.com/shaussler/TheoreticalUniverse/>`_.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Contents:

   licence.rst
   contribute.rst
   introduction/index.rst
   the_cartan_hodge_formalism/index.rst
   rotations/index.rst
   differential_operators/index.rst
   faraday_tensor/index.rst
   field_equations/index.rst
   miscellaneous/index.rst

LINKS:

.. table::
   :align: left

   ============= =======================================================
                     
   ============= =======================================================
   Documentation https://shaussler.github.io/TheoreticalUniverse
   Repository    https://github.com/shaussler/TheoreticalUniverse
   Issues        https://github.com/shaussler/TheoreticalUniverse/issues
   ============= =======================================================
