.. Theoretical Universe (c) by Stéphane Haussler

.. Theoretical Universe is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
.. International License. You should have received a copy of the license along
.. with this work. If not, see <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/>.

.. _hodge_duality:
.. _hodge duality:

Hodge duality
=============

.. rst-class:: custom-author

   by Stéphane Haussler

.. {{{

The Hodge dual is in my opinion often presented with unnecessary complexity,
frequently involving from the start a number of dimensions beyond three,
varying metric signatures, and a formal mathematical approach. However, the
concept is intuitive in the familiar 3-dimensional Euclidean space that we
experience daily. From there, generalizing the concept to 4-dimensional
Minkowski space is natural.

The first part of this article presents the core intuition behind Hodge duality
and is meant to be quite easy to follow. Next comes a shaping operation:
Preparing the generalization to any number of dimensions and metric signatures.
I lay out the relation between the exterior product, matrix determinant,
surface, volume and hypervolume. This will permit to generalize the inner
product to k-vectors. Finally, I systematically calculate of the Hodge duals of
vectors, bivectors, trivectors and quadvectors in Minkowski spacetime with
metric signature :math:`(+,-,-,-)`. The very last step brings us to Hodge
duality on k-forms based on vector/covector duality. This discussion assumes
you, the reader, have a solid understanding of vector and tensor calculus, as
well as familiarity with the exterior product and Élie Cartan's differential
forms.

I systematically use within this pages a toolbox of concepts and notations that
I dub the Cartan-Hodge formalism. The notation is quite standard and should be
widely recognized. In this page, basis vectors :math:`\mathbf{e}_μ` are noted
with the partial derivative symbol :math:`∂_μ`:

.. math::

   \mathbf{e}_t & = ∂_t \\
   \mathbf{e}_x & = ∂_x \\
   \mathbf{e}_y & = ∂_y \\
   \mathbf{e}_z & = ∂_z \\

I don't necessarily expect all readers to have ever considered partial
derivatives as basis vectors. For our purpose, this is simply a matter of a
notation. I use for the inner product either the dot notation :math:`\cdot`, or
the bra-ket notation from quantum mechanics :math:`\braket{|}` when it helps
readability [note1]_.

I point out the work of `Michael Penn <https://www.michael-penn.net>`_  on
`Differential Forms
<https://m.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL22w63XsKjqzQZtDZO_9s2HEMRJnaOTX7>`_ . In
particular, the following videos intersect greatly with the content of this
page:

* `Differential Forms | The Hodge operator via an inner product
  <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=iLlaFBMk_Bs&list=PLHlTqVYmqunWXBoO3xZhQOAoc8oq
  d-2Su&index=58&t=225s&pp=gAQBiAQB>`_.
* `Differential Forms | The Minkowski metric and the Hodge operator
  <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=vDRfADusqYQ>`_.

These videos provide an alternative, yet equivalent, approach to the
conclusions presented here. There is also the added bonus that he
uses the same metric signature :math:`(+,-,-,-)`.

I am currently revisiting this article and expanding its content, particularly
in relation to Minkowski space. As a result, some sections are still in draft
form, and despite my best efforts to ensure accuracy, there may be typos and
errors. This page was last updated on |today|.

.. }}}

Duality in three dimensions
---------------------------

.. {{{

First consider a coordinate basis :math:`∂_x`, :math:`∂_y` and :math:`∂_z` in 3
dimensions corresponding to our intuitive understanding of space. Observe that
we did not merely define three unit vectors, but also three *unit surfaces*,
which we name using the wedge symbol :math:`∧`. The surface along the :math:`x`
and :math:`y` axis is named :math:`∂_x ∧ ∂_y`, along the :math:`y` and
:math:`z` axis :math:`∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, and along the :math:`z` and :math:`x` axis
:math:`∂_z ∧ ∂_x`:

.. image:: _static/hodge_dual_coordinates.png
   :align: center
   :width: 60%

The naming of the surfaces is carefully chosen counterclock-wise. The reason is
that we have not defined a mere surface from two vectors, but an oriented
surface: The surface magnitude can be negative, depending on the chosen
orientation. Here, we take the convention that surfaces oriented
counterclockwise are positive. For example: :math:`∂_z ∧ ∂_x = - ∂_x ∧ ∂_z`.

Remark that we have not only decided on a naming convention, but created new
mathematical objects built from two vectors and a new product denoted with the
wedge symbol :math:`∧`. We call these objects *bivectors*, and the new product
denoted with the wedge symbol :math:`∧` *exterior product*. The fundamental
property of these objects is that they are antisymmetric, and is already given
by the discussion about the surface orientation:

.. math::

   ∂_i ∧ ∂_j = - ∂_j ∧ ∂_i

Necessarily, :math:`∂_i ∧ ∂_i = 0` since two copies of the same vectors cannot
generate a surface. This can also be determined from the antisymmetric property
above.

In 3 dimensions, we note that each basis bivector can be associated with a
unique basis vector:

.. math::

   ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \rightarrow ∂_z \\
   ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \rightarrow ∂_x \\
   ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \rightarrow ∂_y \\

We note this relation with the star symbol :math:`⋆`:

.. math::

   ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y = ∂_z \\
   ⋆ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = ∂_x \\
   ⋆ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x = ∂_y \\

This association defines a unique vector dual to every oriented surfaces called
the Hodge dual. Hodge duality is noted with the star symbol :math:`⋆`, called
the *Hodge star operator*. The relation holds in both direction:

.. math::

   ⋆ ∂_z = ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
   ⋆ ∂_x = ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
   ⋆ ∂_y = ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\

The Hodge dual in three dimensions is the cross product. The cross product
defines a vector perpendicular to the surface whose length is proportional to
the amount of rotation:

.. math::

   ∂_x ⨯ ∂_y = ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y = ∂_z \\
   ∂_y ⨯ ∂_z = ⋆ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = ∂_x \\
   ∂_z ⨯ ∂_x = ⋆ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x = ∂_y \\

This establishes the deep connection between the Hodge dual, rotations,
surfaces, and the cross product.

Going one step futher, we observe that we did not merely define unit surfaces,
but also unit volumes that we note :math:`∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`. We can associate
the unit volume with numbers:

.. math::

   ⋆ \mathbf{1} = ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

As well as:

.. math::

   ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \mathbf{1}

Where :math:`\mathbf{1}` is the unit number. In other words any number can be
expressed as a linear combination of :math:`1`.

.. }}}

.. _pseudo_vectors_and_pseudo_scalars:

Pseudo-vectors and pseudo-scalars
---------------------------------

.. {{{

As a side quest which may be of particular interest to particle physicist, I
discuss the naming *pseudo-vector* and *pseudo-scalar*. From the vector basis,
we have constructed with the following objects:

* scalars,
* vectors,
* bivectors corresponding to oriented surfaces, and
* trivectors corresponding to oriented volumes.

Place these objects in front of a mirror as a *Gedankenexperiment*. Observe the
image of these objects and notice that:

* scalars are unchanged,
* vectors are unchanged,
* oriented surfaces defined from two vectors are flipped with a change of sign,
  and
* oriented volumes defined as trivectors (i.e. from an oriented surface and a
  vector) are also flipped with a change of sign.

This is the reason for the name *pseudo-vector*. These objects look like and
nearly behave like the vectors they are associated to through Hodge duality.
However and contrary to vectors, the sign of the image of a positive oriented
surface goes to negative when placed in front of a mirror. The image of the
Hodge dual vector is flipped.

This is also the reason for the name *pseudo-scalar*. These objects look like
and nearly behave like the scalars they are associated to through Hodge
duality. However and contrary to scalars, the sign of the image of a positive
oriented volume goes to negative when placed in front of a mirror. The image of
the Hodge dual scalar is flipped.

.. }}}

Inner product of k-vectors
--------------------------

.. {{{

The object of this section is to generalize the inner product from vectors to
multivectors. This will be needed to generalize Hodge duality to any number of
dimensions and metric signatures. Indeed, Minkowski space is characterized not
only by 4 dimension, but also by the mixed metric signature :math:`(+,-,-,-)`.
Intuitively, we can guess that the inner product on multivectors should be
influence by the metric signature. In turn, we can then also expect that the
metric signature will play a role for Hodge duality in Minkowski space. We will
see that the concept of the inner product is akin to measuring the size of
shadows in one dimension, two dimensions, three dimensions, and k-dimensions in
all generality.

.. }}}

Inner product of vectors
''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. {{{

I expect you are very familiar with linear algebra, since you are interested in
the more *advanced* topic of Hodge duality. I nonethelss recall what you may
find obvious. The inner product of one vector onto another corresponds to the
projection of one vector onto the other. In that sense, the inner product can
be understood as a one-dimensional shadow:

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/3/3e/
   Dot_Product.svg/600px-Dot_Product.svg.png
   :width: 250px

   Inner product on vectors.

For the basis vectors in flat euclidean space, we obtain:

.. math::

   ∂_i \cdot ∂_j = \braket{∂_i | ∂_j} = δ_{ij}

For the basis 4-vectors in flat Minkowski space, we obtain:

.. math::

   ∂_μ \cdot ∂_ν = \braket{∂_μ | ∂_ν} = η_{μν}

This is the starting point for a procedure which permits to meaningfully lift
the inner product on vectors to the inner products on bivectors, trivectors,
quadvectors, and in all generality to k-vectors.

.. }}}

Surfaces, volumes, hypervolumes, and the determinant of matrices
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. {{{

The next step is to highlight the link between the inner product and the
determinant of matrices. I recall the relationship between the determinant,
surfaces, volumes, and hypervolumes.

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/ad/
   Area_parallellogram_as_determinant.svg/
   891px-Area_parallellogram_as_determinant.svg.png
   :width: 250px

   Surfaces and the determinant of 2x2 matrices.

The area of the surface :math:`S` spanned by the parallelogram defined by a
vector :math:`a ∂_x + b ∂_y` and a vector :math:`c ∂_x + d ∂_y` corresponds to
the determinant of the :math:`2 \times 2` matrice, where each column entries
are the the components of the vectors.

.. math::

   S = \begin{vmatrix}
     a & c \\
     b & d \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = ad - cb

This can equivalently be achieved by calculating the exterior product of these
two vectors:

.. math::

   S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= (a ∂_x + b ∂_y) ∧ (c ∂_x + d ∂_y) \\
               &= (ad - bc) ∂_x ∧ ∂_y

.. admonition:: Calculation
   :class: dropdown

   .. rubric:: Take the exterior product

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= (a ∂_x + b ∂_y) ∧ (c ∂_x + d ∂_y) \\

   .. rubric:: Distribute

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= a ∂_x ∧ (c ∂_x + d ∂_y) + b ∂_y ∧ (c ∂_x + d ∂_y) \\
                  &= a ∂_x ∧ c ∂_x + a ∂_x ∧ d ∂_y + b ∂_y ∧ c ∂_x + b ∂_y ∧ d ∂_y \\

   .. rubric:: Remove zero terms and take the factors in front of expression

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= a ∂_x ∧ d ∂_y + b ∂_y ∧ c ∂_x \\
                  &= a d ∂_x ∧ ∂_y + b c ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\

   .. rubric:: Reorganize and conclude

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= a d ∂_x ∧ ∂_y - b c ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                  &= (ad - bc) ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\

.. admonition:: Calculation in free matrix representation
   :class: dropdown

   Using the free matrix representation from the Cartan-Hodge formalism helps
   organize calculations and yields the same result.

   .. rubric:: Take the exterior product

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y = \begin{bmatrix}
          a ∂_x \\
          b ∂_y \\
      \end{bmatrix}
      ∧ \begin{bmatrix}
          c ∂_x \\
          d ∂_y \\
      \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Distribute and remove zero terms

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y = \begin{bmatrix}
         a ∂_x ∧ d ∂_y \\
         a ∂_x ∧ c ∂_x \\
         b ∂_y ∧ c ∂_x \\
         b ∂_y ∧ d ∂_y
      \end{bmatrix}
      = \begin{bmatrix}
          a ∂_x ∧ d ∂_y \\
          b ∂_y ∧ c ∂_x \\
      \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Reorganize and conclude

   .. math::

      S ∂_x ∧ ∂_y = \begin{bmatrix}
          + a d ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
          - b c ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      \end{bmatrix}
      = (ad - bc) ∂_x ∧ ∂_y\\

The same can be done to calculate the volume :math:`V` of a parallelepiped
defined by three vectors.

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/b/b9/
   Determinant_parallelepiped.svg/912px-Determinant_parallelepiped.svg.png
   :width: 250px

   Volumes and the determinant of 3x3 matrices.

* :math:`r_1 = a ∂_x + b ∂_y + c ∂_z`
* :math:`r_2 = u ∂_x + v ∂_y + w ∂_z`
* :math:`r_3 = p ∂_x + q ∂_y + r ∂_z`

The entries of each columns are the vector components:

.. math::

   V &= \begin{vmatrix}
     a & u & p \\
     b & v & q \\
     c & w & r \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   V = + a \begin{vmatrix}
     v & q \\
     w & r \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   - b \begin{vmatrix}
      u & p \\
      w & r \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   + c \begin{vmatrix}
      u & p \\
      v & q \\
     \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   V = + avr - awq - bur + bwp + cuq - cvp

The above result can be equivalently achieved by taking the exterior product of
these three vectors:

.. math::

   V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = (+avr -awq -bur +bwp +cuq -cvp) ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

.. admonition:: Calculation
   :class: dropdown

   .. rubric:: Wedge the three vectors defining the volume

   .. math::

      V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \begin{bmatrix} a ∂_x \\ b ∂_y \\ c ∂_z \end{bmatrix} ∧
                          \begin{bmatrix} u ∂_x \\ v ∂_y \\ w ∂_z \end{bmatrix} ∧
                          \begin{bmatrix} p ∂_x \\ q ∂_y \\ r ∂_z \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Expand the first two vectors

   .. math::

      V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \begin{bmatrix}
                               av ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                               aw ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                               bu ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\
                               bw ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               cu ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
                               cv ∂_z ∧ ∂_y
                           \end{bmatrix}
                           ∧ \begin{bmatrix}
                                 p ∂_x \\
                                 q ∂_y \\
                                 r ∂_z
                             \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Expand with the third vector

   .. math::

      V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \begin{bmatrix}
                               avr ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               awq ∂_x ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
                               bur ∂_y ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                               bwp ∂_y ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
                               cuq ∂_z ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                               cvp ∂_z ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x
                           \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Reorder

   .. math::

      V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \begin{bmatrix}
                               +avr ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               -awq ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               -bur ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               +bwp ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               +cuq ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                               -cvp ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z
                           \end{bmatrix}

   .. rubric:: Conclude

   .. math::

      V ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = (+avr -awq -bur +bwp +cuq -cvp) ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

This procedure can be generalized to hypervolumes constructed from k-vectors/
The hypervolume is calculated with the determinant of a :math:`k \times k`
matrice, or equivalently by taking the exterior product of k k-vectors.

.. }}}

Inner product of vectors, bivectors, and trivectors in 3-dimensional Euclidean space
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. {{{

In essence, the inner product can be understood as the concept of measuring
shadows. The inner product between two vectors is the measure of the
1-dimensional shadow of one vector onto the other. Similarly, the inner product
between bivectors is the measure of the surface shadow of one surface onto the
other. This 2-dimensional surface can be calculated from the determinant of a
:math:`2 ⨯ 2` matrix. We then generalize to 3-dimensions by calculating the
determinant of :math:`3 ⨯ 3` matrices, corresponding to the volumes covered by
3-vectors. One step further, a k-dimensional shadow measure can then be
calculated using :math:`k ⨯ k` matrices, corresponding to hypervolumes of
dimension k. This permits to find a meaningfull way to *lift* the inner product
from vectors to bivectors, trivectors, and k-vectors. Lifting the inner product
permits to generalize the the Hodge dual to any metric signature, and apply to
Minkowski space with metric signature :math:`(+,-,-,-)`. In 3-dimensional
Euclidean space, the inner product of the basis vectors, denoted with either
the dot symbol :math:`\cdot` or the bracket symbol :math:`\braket{|}` is given
by:

.. math::

   ∂_i \cdot ∂_j = \braket{∂_i|∂_j} = δ_{ij}

Fully expanded, we have the following dot products for each basis vector
combination:

.. topic:: Inner product of vectors

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|ccc}
              & ∂_x & ∂_y & ∂_z \\
          \hline
          ∂_x &   1 &   0 &   0 \\
          ∂_y &   0 &   1 &   0 \\
          ∂_z &   0 &   0 &   1 \\
      \end{array}

A first hint that the inner product can be naturally generalized to surfaces,
is that in 3 dimensions, we can associate a basis surface to each of the basis
vectors through the Hodge dual, as argued at the beginning of this article. It
may then *feel natural,* since :math:`∂_x` is associated to :math:`∂_y ∧ ∂_z`,
to expect that the inner product :math:`\braket{∂_x|∂_x}=1` implies that
:math:`\braket{∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}=1`.

Let us consider two vectors :math:`a^♯` and :math:`b^♯` in 3-dimensional
Euclidean space, written in component form as:

* :math:`a^♯ = p \, ∂_x + q \, ∂_y + r \, ∂_z`
* :math:`b^♯ = u \, ∂_x + v \, ∂_y + w \, ∂_z`

Now consider the components of :math:`a^♯` and :math:`b^♯` along the unit
vectors :math:`∂_x` and :math:`∂_y`:

* :math:`p \, ∂_x + q \, ∂_y`
* :math:`u \, ∂_x + v \, ∂_y`

The measure of the amount of shadow of the surface determined by vectors
:math:`a^♯` and :math:`b^♯` on the :math:`∂_x ∧ ∂_y` plane is the inner product
on bivectors. This lifts the inner product from vectors to bivectors through
the determinant:

.. math::

   \braket{α^♯ ∧ β^♯ | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       p & u \\
       q & v \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = pv - qu

In the same manner we obtain:

.. math::

   \braket{α^♯ ∧ β^♯ | ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       q & v \\
       r & w \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = qw - rv

.. math::

   \braket{α^♯ ∧ β^♯ | ∂_z ∧ ∂_x} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       r & w \\
       p & u \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = ru - pw

With this quantities, we have measured the amount of shadow from the surface
determined by vectors :math:`a^♯` and :math:`b^♯` onto the unit bivectors
:math:`∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, :math:`∂_z ∧ ∂_x`, and :math:`∂_x ∧ ∂_y`, . We can modify
the expressions slightly in order to relate the vector components to the inner
product of vectors. Vector components can be obtained by doting the vectors
with the basis vectors:

.. math::

   \braket{a^♯ ∧ b^♯ | ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       q & v \\
       r & w \\
   \end{vmatrix} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_y} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_y} \\
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_z} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_z} \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{a^♯ ∧ b^♯ | ∂_z ∧ ∂_x} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       r & w \\
       p & u \\
   \end{vmatrix} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_z} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_z} \\
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_x} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_x} \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{a^♯ ∧ b^♯ | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       p & u \\
       q & v \\
   \end{vmatrix} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_x} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_x} \\
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_y} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_y} \\
   \end{vmatrix}

Put together in condensed form:

.. math::

   \braket{a^♯ ∧ b^♯ | ∂_k ∧ ∂_l} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_k} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_k} \\
       \braket{a^♯ | ∂_l} & \braket{b^♯ | ∂_l} \\
   \end{vmatrix}

With this, we can determine the surface of any arbitrary bivector compared to
the basis bivectors. In particular We can replace vectors :math:`a^♯` and
:math:`b^♯` with any of the basis vectors :math:`∂_x`, :math:`∂_y`, or
:math:`∂_z`. We now have a technique to determine the inner product of basis
bivectors:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_i ∧ ∂_j | ∂_k ∧ ∂_l} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_i | ∂_k} & \braket{∂_j | ∂_k} \\
       \braket{∂_i | ∂_l} & \braket{∂_j | ∂_l} \\
   \end{vmatrix}

Which permits to obtain:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}
   =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_y} \\
       \braket{∂_y | ∂_z} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_z} \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       1 & 0 \\
       0 & 1 \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   =1

.. math::

   \braket{∂_z ∧ ∂_x | ∂_z ∧ ∂_x}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_z | ∂_z} & \braket{∂_x | ∂_z} \\
       \braket{∂_z | ∂_x} & \braket{∂_x | ∂_x} \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       1 & 0 \\
       0 & 1 \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = 1

.. math::

   \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_x | ∂_x} & \braket{∂_y | ∂_x} \\
       \braket{∂_x | ∂_y} & \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       1 & 0 \\
       0 & 1 \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = 1

All other inner products are zero. For example:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_y | ∂_x} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_x} \\
       \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_y} \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       0 & 0 \\
       0 & 0 \\
   \end{vmatrix}
   = 0

In summary, we obtain:

.. topic:: Inner product of bivectors

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|cccc}
                    & ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & ∂_z ∧ ∂_x & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
         \hline
          ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & 1         & 0         & 0         \\
          ∂_z ∧ ∂_x & 0         & 1         & 0         \\
          ∂_x ∧ ∂_y & 0         & 0         & 1         \\
      \end{array}

Finally, we generalize lifting the inner product to trivectors. In
3-dimensional Euclidean space, we get for the unit trivector:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       \braket{∂_x | ∂_x} & \braket{∂_y | ∂_x} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_x}\\
       \braket{∂_x | ∂_y} & \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_y}\\
       \braket{∂_x | ∂_z} & \braket{∂_y | ∂_z} & \braket{∂_z | ∂_z}\\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} =
   \begin{vmatrix}
       1 & 0 & 0\\
       0 & 1 & 0\\
       0 & 0 & 1\\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} = 1

In table form, we have:

.. topic:: Inner product of trivectors

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|c}
                         & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
         \hline
         ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &               1 \\
      \end{array}

With this, we remark we have found a meaningfull and reasonable way to extend
the inner product to k-forms in Minkowski space. This approach is meaningful,
as the inner product of the basis vectors inherently incorporates the metric
signature.

.. }}}

Inner product of k-vectors in Minkowski space
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

.. {{{

The inner product in Minkowski space of the basis vectors is:

.. math::

   ∂_μ \cdot ∂_ν = \braket{∂_μ|∂_ν} = η_{μν}

Fully expanded in table form we have:

.. topic:: Inner product of vectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|rrrr}
              & ∂_t & ∂_x & ∂_y & ∂_z \\
          \hline
          ∂_t & +1  &  0  &  0  &  0  \\
          ∂_x &  0  & -1  &  0  &  0  \\
          ∂_y &  0  &  0  & -1  &  0  \\
          ∂_z &  0  &  0  &  0  & -1  \\
      \end{array}

We use our procedure for lifting the inner product to bivectors:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_μ ∧ ∂_ν | ∂_ρ ∧ ∂_σ}
   = \begin{vmatrix}
       ∂_μ \cdot ∂_ρ & ∂_ν \cdot ∂_ρ \\
       ∂_μ \cdot ∂_σ & ∂_ν \cdot ∂_σ \\
   \end{vmatrix}

We get in table form:

.. topic:: Inner product of bivectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|rrrrrr}
                & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z & ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & ∂_z ∧ ∂_x & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                \hline
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_x & -1        &  0        &  0        &   0       &  0        &  0        \\
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_y &  0        & -1        &  0        &   0       &  0        &  0        \\
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_z &  0        &  0        & -1        &   0       &  0        &  0        \\
      ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &  0        &  0        &  0        &  +1       &  0        &  0        \\
      ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &  0        &  0        &  0        &   0       & +1        &  0        \\
      ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &  0        &  0        &  0        &   0       &  0        & +1        \\
      \end{array}

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   In this dropdown section, I extend the inner product to all non-zero
   bivector combinations and provide an example of a zero combination.

   .. rubric:: Basis bivectors involving the temporal dimension

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_x \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              + & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = -1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_y | ∂_t ∧ ∂_y} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_y \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              + & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = -1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_z} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_z \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_z & ∂_z \cdot ∂_z \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              + & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = -1

   .. rubric:: Basis bivectors involving the spatial dimensions

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_y \cdot ∂_y & ∂_z \cdot ∂_y \\
          ∂_y \cdot ∂_z & ∂_z \cdot ∂_z \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              - & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = +1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_z ∧ ∂_x | ∂_z ∧ ∂_x} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_z \cdot ∂_z & ∂_x \cdot ∂_z \\
          ∂_z \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              - & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = +1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_x \cdot ∂_x & ∂_y \cdot ∂_x \\
          ∂_x \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
              - & 1 & \;   & 0 \\
                & 0 & \; - & 1 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = +1

   .. rubric:: Basis vectors resulting in zero inner products

   All other inner products are zero. I demonstrate one example calculation,
   assuming the remaining cases will be clear to the reader.

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y} =
      \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_y & ∂_x \cdot ∂_y \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
            \begin{alignedat}{3}
                & 0 & \; + & 1 \\
                & 0 & \;   & 0 \\
             \end{alignedat}
      \end{vmatrix}
      = 0

   .. }}}

As well as for trivectors:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_μ ∧ ∂_ν ∧ ∂_λ | ∂_ρ ∧ ∂_σ ∧ ∂_τ} = \begin{vmatrix}
       ∂_μ \cdot ∂_ρ & ∂_ν \cdot ∂_ρ & ∂_λ \cdot ∂_ρ \\
       ∂_μ \cdot ∂_σ & ∂_ν \cdot ∂_σ & ∂_λ \cdot ∂_σ \\
       ∂_μ \cdot ∂_τ & ∂_ν \cdot ∂_τ & ∂_λ \cdot ∂_τ \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. topic:: Inner product of trivectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|rrrr}
                      & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                      \hline
      ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z & -1              &  0              &   0             &   0             \\
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &  0              & +1              &   0             &   0             \\
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &  0              &  0              &  +1             &   0             \\
      ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &  0              &  0              &   0             &  +1             \\
      \end{array}

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_x \cdot ∂_x & ∂_y \cdot ∂_x & ∂_z \cdot ∂_x \\
          ∂_x \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y & ∂_z \cdot ∂_y \\
          ∂_x \cdot ∂_z & ∂_y \cdot ∂_z & ∂_z \cdot ∂_z \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      =  \begin{vmatrix}
          -1 &  0 &  0 \\
           0 & -1 &  0 \\
           0 &  0 & -1 \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = -1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_y \cdot ∂_t & ∂_z \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y & ∂_z \cdot ∂_y \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_z & ∂_y \cdot ∂_z & ∂_z \cdot ∂_z \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          +1 &  0 &  0 \\
           0 & -1 &  0 \\
           0 &  0 & -1 \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = 1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x | ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_z \cdot ∂_t & ∂_x \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_z & ∂_z \cdot ∂_z & ∂_x \cdot ∂_z \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_x & ∂_z \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          +1 &  0 &  0 \\
           0 & -1 &  0 \\
           0 &  0 & -1 \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = 1

   .. math::

      \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y}
      = \begin{vmatrix}
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_x \cdot ∂_t & ∂_y \cdot ∂_t \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x & ∂_y \cdot ∂_x \\
          ∂_t \cdot ∂_y & ∂_x \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      =  \begin{vmatrix}
          +1 &  0 &  0 \\
           0 & -1 &  0 \\
           0 &  0 & -1 \\
      \end{vmatrix}
      = 1

   .. }}}

In Minkowski space, all quadvectors are proportional to :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} = \begin{vmatrix}
       ∂_t \cdot ∂_t & ∂_x \cdot ∂_t & ∂_y \cdot ∂_t & ∂_y \cdot ∂_t \\
       ∂_t \cdot ∂_x & ∂_x \cdot ∂_x & ∂_y \cdot ∂_x & ∂_y \cdot ∂_x \\
       ∂_t \cdot ∂_y & ∂_x \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y & ∂_y \cdot ∂_y \\
       ∂_t \cdot ∂_z & ∂_x \cdot ∂_z & ∂_y \cdot ∂_z & ∂_y \cdot ∂_z \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} = \begin{vmatrix}
       +1 &  0 &  0 &  0 \\
        0 & -1 &  0 &  0 \\
        0 &  0 & -1 &  0 \\
        0 &  0 &  0 & -1 \\
   \end{vmatrix}

.. math::

   \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} = -1

.. topic:: Inner product of quadvectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{array}{c|c}
                                & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
          \hline
          ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &                    -1 \\
      \end{array}

.. }}}

Formal and natural definition
-----------------------------

.. {{{

In 3-dimensional Euclidean space, the Hodge dual of a k-vector :math:`β` is
uniquely defined by the property that for any other k-vector :math:`α`, the
following property holds:

.. math::

   α ∧ ⋆ β = \braket{α | β} \; ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

In essence, this asks: Given a k-vector, which m-vector fills the remaining
space? Where the inner product :math:`\braket{α | β}` ensures that :math:`⋆ β`
is unique. This question can be viewed as a *natural definition*  and be used
for practical calculations. For 4-dimensional Minkowski space, the definition
is:

.. math::

   α ∧ ⋆ β = \braket{α | β} \; ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

For instance, when seeking the Hodge dual :math:`⋆(∂_t ∧ ∂_x)`, we know that it
must be :math:`∂_y ∧ ∂_z` to complete the space, with the sign determined by
the inner product :math:`\braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x} = -1`. Therefore, in
this example, we obtain:

.. math::

   ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x = - ∂_y ∧ ∂_z

.. }}}

.. _duality_in_minkowski_space:
.. _Duality in Minkowski Space:

Duality in Minkowski space
--------------------------

k-vectors
'''''''''

.. {{{

With this, we can conclude and fully determine the Hodge dual of all k-vectors
in Minkowski space:

.. topic:: Hodge duals of vectors in Minkowski Space

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t & = ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   .. rubric:: Determine the Hodge duals up to the sign

   To obtain the volume element :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, the Hodge duals
   must be proportional to:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_t & \propto & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & \propto & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & \propto & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & \propto & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. rubric:: Check the sign

   Since the above was mentally determined, we check by wedging the left part
   to the right part of the equations above in order to make sure the sign is
   positive when reordered into the volume element :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧
   ∂_z`.

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t \propto ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \rightarrow \phantom{-} ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_x \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \rightarrow &   & ∂_x ∧ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
                                                & - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
                                                &   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}
   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_y \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \rightarrow &   & ∂_y ∧ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                                                & - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                                                & - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_z \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \rightarrow &   & ∂_z ∧ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\
                                                & - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\
                                                &   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
                                                & - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                                                &   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. rubric:: Use the definition of the Hodge dual

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_t & = \braket{∂_t | ∂_t} & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & = \braket{∂_x | ∂_x} & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & = \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & = \braket{∂_z | ∂_z} & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. rubric:: Reorder

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{3}
      ⋆ ∂_t & = \braket{∂_t | ∂_t} & (+1) & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & = \braket{∂_x | ∂_x} & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & = \braket{∂_y | ∂_y} & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & = \braket{∂_z | ∂_z} & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. rubric:: Apply the values of the inner products

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{3}
      ⋆ ∂_t & = (+1) & (+1) & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & = (-1) & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & = (-1) & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & = (-1) & (-1) & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. rubric:: Conclude

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t & = ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_x & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ ∂_y & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_z & = ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\

   If you feel more comfortable with a more *mechanical approach* I redirect
   you to the video by Michael Penn: `Differential Forms | The Minkowski metric
   and the Hodge operator <https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=vDRfADusqYQ>`_.

   .. }}}

.. topic:: Hodge duals of bivectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_x) &= -& ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) &= -& ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_z) &= -& ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_y ∧ ∂_z) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_z ∧ ∂_x) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_x ∧ ∂_y) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   To obtain the volume element :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, the Hodge duals
   must be proportional to:

   .. math::

      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_x) \propto ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) \propto ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_z) \propto ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_y ∧ ∂_z) \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_z ∧ ∂_x) \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_x ∧ ∂_y) \propto ∂_t ∧ ∂_z \\

   For example, taking the second entry as an example :math:`⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) \propto
   ∂_z ∧ ∂_x`, we have:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) \propto ∂_z ∧ ∂_x  & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
                                       & \rightarrow - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                                       & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   Taken all together and with the inner product, we have:

   .. math::

      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_x) &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x|∂_t ∧ ∂_x} \, ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_y|∂_t ∧ ∂_y} \, ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_z) &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_z|∂_t ∧ ∂_z} \, ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_y ∧ ∂_z) &= \braket{∂_y ∧ ∂_z|∂_y ∧ ∂_z} \, ∂_t ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_z ∧ ∂_x) &= \braket{∂_z ∧ ∂_x|∂_z ∧ ∂_x} \, ∂_t ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_x ∧ ∂_y) &= \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y|∂_x ∧ ∂_y} \, ∂_t ∧ ∂_z \\

   Which simplifies to:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{3}
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_x) &= -& ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_y) &= -& ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_t ∧ ∂_z) &= -& ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_y ∧ ∂_z) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x \\
      ⋆ (∂_z ∧ ∂_x) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y \\
      ⋆ (∂_x ∧ ∂_y) &=  & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. }}}

.. topic:: Hodge duals of trivectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= ∂_t \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &= ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= ∂_z \\

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   To obtain the volume element :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, the Hodge duals
   must be proportional to:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &\propto - & ∂_t \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &\propto   & ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &\propto   & ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &\propto   & ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   Indeed, we check this for all entries:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \propto ∂_t & \rightarrow   & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_t \\
                                    & \rightarrow - & ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z \\
                                    & \rightarrow   & ∂_x ∧ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
                                    & \rightarrow - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \propto ∂_x & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \\
                                    & \rightarrow - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z \\
                                    & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x \propto ∂_y & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \\
                                    & \rightarrow - & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_y \\
                                    & \rightarrow   & ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y \propto ∂_z \rightarrow \phantom{-} ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \\

   Taken all together and with the inner product:

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= \braket{∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}- & ∂_t \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z}  & ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x | ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x}  & ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y}  & ∂_z \\
      \end{alignedat}

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= ∂_t \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z &= ∂_x \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_z ∧ ∂_x &= ∂_y \\
      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y &= ∂_z \\

   .. }}}

.. topic:: Hodge duals of quadvectors in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = - 1

.. admonition:: Calculations
   :class: dropdown

   .. {{{

   To obtain the volume element :math:`∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z`, the Hodge duals
   must be proportional to:

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z \propto 1

   Taken all together and with the inner product:

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = \braket{∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z | ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z} - 1

   .. math::

      ⋆ ∂_t ∧ ∂_x ∧ ∂_y ∧ ∂_z = -1

   .. }}}

k-forms
'''''''

We repeat the definition of the Hodge dual of k-vectors to k-forms. Indeed the
inner product is:

.. math::

   \braket{∂_μ | ∂_ν} = \braket{dx^μ | dx^ν}

We seek the dual k-form that fills the 4-dimensional space: the Hodge dual is
defined by the property that for all k-forms :math:`α` and :math:`β`, the
following holds:

.. math::

   α ∧ ⋆ β = \braket{α | β} dt ∧ dx ∧ dy ∧ dz

.. topic:: Hodge duals of 1-forms in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      ⋆ dt & = dx ∧ dy ∧ dz \\
      ⋆ dx & = dt ∧ dy ∧ dz \\
      ⋆ dy & = dt ∧ dz ∧ dx \\
      ⋆ dz & = dt ∧ dx ∧ dy \\

.. topic:: Hodge duals of 2-forms in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      \begin{alignedat}{2}
      ⋆ dt ∧ dx &= -& dy ∧ dz \\
      ⋆ dt ∧ dy &= -& dz ∧ dx \\
      ⋆ dt ∧ dz &= -& dx ∧ dy \\
      ⋆ dy ∧ dz &=  & dt ∧ dx \\
      ⋆ dz ∧ dx &=  & dt ∧ dy \\
      ⋆ dx ∧ dy &=  & dt ∧ dz \\
      \end{alignedat}

.. topic:: Hodge duals of 3-forms in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      ⋆ dx ∧ dy ∧ dz &= dt \\
      ⋆ dt ∧ dy ∧ dz &= dx \\
      ⋆ dt ∧ dz ∧ dx &= dy \\
      ⋆ dt ∧ dx ∧ dy &= dz \\

.. topic:: Hodge duals of 4-forms in Minkowski space

   .. math::

      ⋆ dt ∧ dx ∧ dy ∧ dz = - 1

.. }}}

Notes
-----

.. {{{

.. [note1] The bra :math:`\bra{}` notation corresponds to the musical flat
   operator :math:`♭`, whereas the :math:`\ket{}` notation corresponds to the
   musical sharp operator :math:`♯`. Hence we have :math:`dx^i = ∂_i^♭ =
   \bra{∂_i} = \bra{∂_i^♭} = \bra{dx^i}`, and :math:`∂_i = (dx^i)^♯ = \ket{∂_i}
   = \ket{(dx^i)^♯} = \ket{∂_i}`

.. }}}

